  Cart
Log In
CommunityBlog Events Webinars Tutorials Forum
Search
Community  Blog  Understanding and Changing Runlevels in Systemd
Understanding and Changing Runlevels in Systemd
Alibaba Clouder March 7, 2019  26,714 0
In this article, we will explore how to manage runlevels in a systemd-based Linux server.
By Alain Francois, Alibaba Cloud Tech Share Author. Tech Share is Alibaba Cloud's incentive program to encourage the sharing of technical knowledge and best practices within the cloud community.

Linux systems have used a system initialization process from the UNIX SysV standard. The init daemon runs a series of scripts to start other daemons on the system to provide system services and also allow users to log in and use the system. Because the init daemon often has to manage several daemons at once, it categorizes the system into runlevels. Runlevels are an old traditional way to start and stop groups of services used in SysV init.

However, the recent Linux distributions have adopted a new system initialization process known as Systemd. Systemd is completely compatible with the UNIX SysV standard yet implements new features for managing all system devices, including Linux kernel modules, daemons, and network sockets. It uses targets instead of runlevels and provides a compatibility layer that maps runlevels to targets, and associated binaries like runlevel. Each target has a unique name, and multiple targets can be active at one time. In this article we will talk about runlevels in SysV and Systemd, then their modification in each context.

Understanding the Initialization Process
The original Linux init program was based on the Unix System V init program, and it became commonly called SysV. The SysV init program uses a series of shell scripts, divided into separate runlevels, to determine what programs run at what times. Each program uses a separate shell script to start and stop the program. Furthermore, the init daemon is responsible for starting and stopping daemons after system initialization.

The system administrator sets the runlevel in which the Linux system starts, which in turn determines which set of programs is running and can also change the runlevel at any time while the system is running. The system boot process is considered complete when all the enabled services are operational for the boot target and users are able to log in to the system. There are currently three popular initialization process methods used in Linux distributions:

Unix System V also called SysV
Upstart
Systemd
What Is Systemd?
Systemd for system daemon is the newest system initializing for the SysVinit model replacing both init and Upstart that is responsible for starting all kinds of things in new Linux distributions. It has fast-tracked system initialization and state transitioning by introducing parallel processing of startup scripts, improved handling of service dependencies, and an on-demand activation of service daemons using sockets and D-Bus. The systemd initialization process introduced a major paradigm shift in how Linux systems handle services.

Instead of using shell scripts and runlevels, the systemd method uses units and targets. A systemd unit defines a service or action on the system which consists of a name, a type, and a configuration file while a systemd target represents a different group of services that should be running on the system.

Runlevels Explained
A runlevel is essentially a set of capabilities or running services that you can pre-define and set the system to boot to so you have a predictable set of services. It defines the number and type of daemons that are loaded into memory and executed by the kernel on a particular system. Because the init daemon often has to manage several daemons at once, the init daemon categorizes the system into runlevels.

The Different Runlevels
In SysVinit systems, you had a defined but configurable set of runlevels numbered from 0 to 6. The init program uses a series of shell scripts, divided into separate runlevels, to determine what programs run at what times:

The S and s are synonymous with runlevel 1 as far as many utilities are concerned
Runlevels 0, 1, and 6 are reserved for special purposes
The remaining runlevels are available for whatever purposes you can decide
You can see below a detailed description of runlevels in Sys V:

Runlevel 0 or Halt is used to shift the computer from one state to another. It shut down the system.
Runlevel 1, s, S or Single-User Mode is used for administrative and recovery functions. It has only enough daemons to allow one user (the root user) to log in and perform system maintenance tasks. All local file systems are mounted. Some essential services are started, but networking remains disabled.
Runlevel 2 or Multi-user Mode is used for most daemons running and allows multiple users the ability to log in and use system services but without networking. On Debian and its derivatives, a full multi-user mode with X running and a graphical login. Most other distributions leave this runlevel undefined.
Runlevel 3 or Extended Multi-user Mode is used for a full multi-user mode with a console (without GUI) login screen with network services available
Runlevel 4 is not normally used and undefined so it can be used for a personal customization
Runlevel 5 or Graphical Mode is same as Runlevel 3 with graphical login _(such as GDN)_.
Runlevel 6 or Reboot is a transitional runlevel to reboot the system.
Changing Runlevels
It is possible to see the current runlevel on the system with the command runlevel. It also shows the previous runlevel and you can know if the runlevel have been changed since the last system startup.

$ runlevel
N 5
The N stands for none, meaning there has been no run level changed since powering up. To change the runlevel, you use the telinit command. For example, we will set the runlevel 3.

$ sudo telinit 3
When you change the runlevel, the command is applied directly so the system will reboot with the new runlevel in command mode. If you check the current runlevel, you will see the previous and the new one

$ runlevel
5 3
Don't configure your default runlevel to 0 (shutdown) or 6 (reboot). If you do, your system will immediately shutdown or reboot once it finishes powering up. Also make sure to don't use the telinit command to shutdown or reboot your system because it can make your users lost their work so, use the shutdown command instead.

Target in Systemd
In systemd, targets are the new runlevels. Targets are simply logical collections of units. They are a special systemd unit type with the .target file extension. A systemd target defines the state a system should be in, and the processes and services that should be started to get into that state.

The Different Targets
Some targets are equivalent to SysVinit runlevels; however, they are named rather than numbered and we can quote :

poweroff.target (runlevel 0): shutdown and power off the system
rescue.target (runlevel 1): launch the rescue shell session
multi-user.target (runlevel 2,3,4): set the system in non graphical (console) multi-user system
graphical.target (runlevel 5): use a graphical multi-user system with network services
reboot.target (runlevel 6): shutdown and reboot the system
Changing a Target
You can list the currently loaded targets units and see all the those which are loaded and activated.

$ systemctl list-units --type target
    UNIT                   LOAD   ACTIVE SUB    DESCRIPTION                  
    basic.target           loaded active active Basic System                 
    cryptsetup.target      loaded active active Local Encrypted Volumes      
    getty.target           loaded active active Login Prompts                
    graphical.target       loaded active active Graphical Interface          
    local-fs-pre.target    loaded active active Local File Systems (Pre)     
    local-fs.target        loaded active active Local File Systems           
    multi-user.target      loaded active active Multi-User System            
    network-online.target  loaded active active Network is Online            
    network.target         loaded active active Network                      
    nss-lookup.target      loaded active active Host and Network Name Lookups
    nss-user-lookup.target loaded active active User and Group Name Lookups  
    paths.target           loaded active active Paths                        
    remote-fs.target       loaded active active Remote File Systems          
    slices.target          loaded active active Slices                       
    sockets.target         loaded active active Sockets                      
    sound.target           loaded active active Sound Card                   
    swap.target            loaded active active Swap                         
    sysinit.target         loaded active active System Initialization        
    time-sync.target       loaded active active System Time Synchronized     
    timers.target          loaded active active Timers                       
    
    LOAD   = Reflects whether the unit definition was properly loaded.
    ACTIVE = The high-level unit activation state, i.e. generalization of SUB.
    SUB    = The low-level unit activation state, values depend on unit type.
    
    20 loaded units listed. Pass --all to see loaded but inactive units, too.
    To show all installed unit files use 'systemctl list-unit-files'.
You can change the current target with the isolate option. Remember that the system will directly apply the change by rebooting

$ sudo systemctl isolate multi-user.target
After the reboot, you can check all the target with --all option and you will see that the graphical.target is not activated on the last line of our output.

$ systemctl list-units --type target --all 
      UNIT                   LOAD      ACTIVE   SUB    DESCRIPTION                  
    ● all.target             not-found inactive dead   all.target                   
      basic.target           loaded    active   active Basic System                 
      cryptsetup.target      loaded    active   active Local Encrypted Volumes      
      emergency.target       loaded    inactive dead   Emergency Mode               
      getty-pre.target       loaded    inactive dead   Login Prompts (Pre)          
      getty.target           loaded    active   active Login Prompts                
      graphical.target       loaded    inactive dead   Graphical Interface   
Notice that we have the default target which is different to the currently loaded target. It is the one on which the system will always start up. It means that the current target can be the multi-user.target for a precise task while the default target can be rescue.target or vice-versa.

The default target is specified by the file /etc/systemd/system/default.target and is a link to a target file in the /lib/systemd/system folder. You can use the systemctl get-default command to determine
the default target. We can check it while we are currently in multi-user.target for our example above

$ systemctl get-default
graphical.target
If you reboot, the system will naturally boot on your default graphical mode. You can change the default target with

$ sudo systemctl set-default rescue.target
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/default.target → /lib/systemd/system/rescue.target.
Now if you reboot, you will see a message indicating that you are in rescue mode and the default user in rescue will be root.

Systemd is now set by default with many popular Linux distributions such as Ubuntu 15.04, Mandriva, Debian 8, Mageia, Arch Linux, CentOS 7, RHEL 7.0. It's considered more efficient and parallel in operation than SysVinit and can dramatically reduce system startup times.

Linux Computing Tech Share Runlevel Systemd
Share on   
Read previous post:
Managing Your Firewall on Centos 7 with Firewalld

 
Read next post:
Everything You Need to Know about ApsaraDB for MariaDB TX

You may also like
How to Install Cockpit on Ubuntu 18.04
Alibaba Clouder - September 28, 2018

 Getting Started with Kubernetes | Pods and Container Design Modes
Alibaba Developer - March 31, 2020

 How to Use Journalctl to Consult Server Logs
Alibaba Clouder - October 2, 2018

 Running Your Node.js Application on ECS with Systemd or Forever
Alibaba Clouder - June 5, 2019

 Using Prometheus and Blackbox Exporter to Monitor Services on Alibaba Cloud
Alibaba Clouder - May 20, 2020

 Managing Your Firewall on Centos 7 with Firewalld
Alibaba Clouder - March 7, 2019

Comments
Write your comment...
 
Alibaba Clouder
2,605 posts | 742 followers

Follow
Related Products
 ECS(Elastic Compute Service)
Elastic and secure virtual cloud servers to cater all your cloud hosting needs.

 VPC
A virtual private cloud service that provides an isolated cloud network to operate resources in a secure environment.

 CloudMonitor
Automate performance monitoring of all your web resources and applications in real-time

More Posts by Alibaba ClouderSee All 
MyBatis with a More Fluent Experience
Alibaba Cloud Sustainability Report 2021
Comparing CNI Models in Container Service for Kubernetes — Alibaba Cloud Series Part 1
[Infographic] 5 Steps to Accelerate Your Digitalization in Asia
Attackers Use the Vulnerability of ShowDoc to Spread Botnets
Powerful: MyBatis and Three Streaming Query Methods
What is the Difference between Spring Boot and Spring?
What are the Differences and Functions of the Redo Log, Undo Log, and Binlog in MySQL?
On the In-Depth Cluster Scheduling and Management
Alibaba Technological Practices: Experiences in Cloud Resource Scheduling
A Free Trial That Lets You Build Big!
Start building with 50+ products and up to 12 months usage for Elastic Compute Service

About Us Privacy Policy Legal Notice List
Alibaba Group Taobao Marketplace Tmall Juhuasuan AliExpress Alibaba.com 1688 Alimama Alitrip YunOS AutoNavi UCWeb Umeng Xiami DingTalk Alipay
© 2009-2024 Copyright by Alibaba Cloud All rights reserved
TRUSTe TRUSTe 
phone
alicare